Licence Agreement for WebOrganiser
----------------------------------

Copyright (C) 2005, 2006, 2007 Paul Boddie <paul@boddie.org.uk>

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more
details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

Notes on Icons and Images
-------------------------

The inclusion of icons can be configured by the packager, but where such icons
have been included there are from the following sources:

Everaldo's "Crystal SVG" icon theme for KDE
  - see COPYING-CrystalSVG.txt for copyright and licensing information

Everaldo's "Crystal Clear" icon theme for KDE
  - see COPYING-CrystalClear.txt for copyright and licensing information from
    the Debian repackaging of that work

Tango Icon Theme
  - see COPYING-Tango.txt and AUTHORS-Tango.txt for copyright and licensing
    information from the original source package

In the tools/patches directory, a patch against one of the Tango icons has
been included. Whilst this only removes text from the original icon, it is
hereby acknowledged that the included text originates from the Tango icon
named in the patch.

The presence of ICONS.txt files indicates supplied icons in those locations
where such icons reside.

Copyright and Licensing Information for Other Software
------------------------------------------------------

The applications in this distribution use files from the Sarissa distribution
(see http://sarissa.sourceforge.net). These files were made available under
the GNU Lesser General Public License (version 2.1 or later) and under the GNU
General Public License (version 2 or later); the former licence is found in
the LICENCE-Sarissa-lgpl.txt file, whereas the latter is found in the
LICENCE-Sarissa-gpl.txt file.
