.. Revision: $Id: README 45 2007-04-01 21:09:24Z krys $

TurboLucene
===========

About
-----

TurboLucene is a library that allows TurboGears_ applications to use PyLucene_
for full text searching.  It features a simple interface and takes care of all
the nasty threading issues that exist between PyLucene and CherryPy_ (which is
used by TurboGears).

It now also features multi-lingual support for *Czech*, *Danish*, *German*,
*Greek*, *English*, *Spanish*, *Finnish*, *French*, *Italian*, *Japanese*,
*Korean*, *Dutch*, *Norwegian*, *Portuguese*, *Brazilian*, *Russian*,
*Swedish*, and *Chinese*, including pre-configured stopwords for most
languages.

.. _TurboGears: http://turbogears.org/
.. _PyLucene: http://pylucene.osafoundation.org/
.. _CherryPy: http://cherrypy.org


Requirements
------------

 * PyLucene 2.0.0 or better
 * TurboGears 1.0 or better

Thanks to setuptools, TurboGears and it's dependencies will be installed
automatically, if necessary.  However, PyLucene must be downloaded and
installed manually.

TurboLucene is not very demanding and may work with earlier versions of both
PyLucene and TurboGears, but other versions have not been tested.


Installation
------------

TurboLucene uses setuptools, so installation is as easy as::

  easy_install TurboLucene

or::

  python setup.py install

For more installation options, try::

  python setup.py --help


Manual Download
---------------

The latest version can always be downloaded at http://dev.krys.ca/turbolucene.


Documentation
-------------

Documentation for TurboLucene can be found at:

  http://dev.krys.ca/turbolucene/#Documentation


Limitations
-----------

TurboLucene is still in early stages of development.  It has not been
optimised, extensively tested, benchmarked or profiled for performance or
memory usage.  Finally, there are no test cases yet.

The plan is to eliminate these limitations, eventually.

Patches and suggestions are welcome! :-)


License
-------

TurboLucene is licensed under the MIT license.  See the LICENSE file for
details.


Contact
-------

TurboLucene's web site is:

  http://dev.krys.ca/turbolucene

You can find more documentation there.  It is also where you can submit bugs.
TurboLucene mailing list information can be found at:

  http://dev.krys.ca/turbolucene/#MailingList

The mailing list is the place to ask any questions or make suggestions.
Patches, bug reports, bug fixes and suggestions are all welcome! :-)


Author
======

The author of TurboLucene is Krys Wilken.  Feel free to contact him at krys AT
krys DOT ca.


Thanks
======

Special thanks goes out to all the brilliant and hard working people of the
TurboGears and PyLucene projects. Without their tireless efforts, this project
would not exist!

Also thanks to everyone in the Open Source and Free Software communities. I
really believe the spirit and philosophy of the FLOSS movement will change the
world. I am happy to be able to give a little back.
