.TH CryptoBoxWebserver 1 "November 02006" "cryptobox" "daemon"
.SH NAME
CryptoBoxWebserver \- start the webserver of the \fBCryptoBox\fR package.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B CryptoBoxWebserver
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The CryptoBoxWebserver is a web interface that allows you to manage encrypted and
plaintext disks of your computer without using the commandline interface. It works
easily together with \fBsamba\fR, \fBapache2-dav\fI and \fBftp\fR servers to provide
simple access to your data.
.SH OPTIONS
The following options control the behaviour of the CryptoBoxWebserver:
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-config\fR=\fBFILE\fR
Use the specified configuration file.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-port\fR=\fBPORT\fR
Specify a port to listen to. The default port is 8080.
.TP
\fB\-\-host\fR=\fBHOST\fR
Specify the interface to listen to by providing a resolvable name or an ip. The server
listens to all interfaces by default.
.TP
\fB\-B\fR
Run the webserver in the background. By default the process will stay attached to the
terminal.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-user\fR=\fBUSER\fR
Run with the permissions of the given user after connecting to the port. You may use a
uid or a name.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR
Quiet output - only errors will get reported.
.TP
\fB\-\-pidfile\fR=\fBFILE\fR
Specify a pid file for the webserver.
.TP
\fB\-\-datadir\fR=\fBDIRECTORY\fR
Specify the location of the data directory of the webserver. The default location is
\fI/usr/share/cryptobox/www-data\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Show the version of the \fBCryptoBox\fR and exit immediately.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Show the help message and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.IP PYTHONPATH
You may want to define this variable in case that you installed the \fBCryptoBox\fR
python package in a non-default location.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Lars Kruse
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <devel@sumpfralle.de>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 02006 Lars Kruse

