Copyright and Trademarks
========================

*The repoze.bfg Web Application Framework*

by Chris McDonough

Copyright Â©2008-2010, Agendaless Consulting.

All rights reserved.  This material may be copied or distributed only
subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the `Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 United States
License <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/us/>`_.  You
must give the original author credit.  You may not use this work for
commercial purposes.  You may not alter, transform, or build upon this
work.

.. note::

   While the :mod:`repoze.bfg` documentation is offered under the
   Creative Commons Attribution-Nonconmmercial-No Derivative Works 3.0
   United States License, the :mod:`repoze.bfg` *software* is offered
   under a `less restrictive (BSD-like) license
   <http://repoze.org/license.html>`_ .

**Trademarks**

All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or
service marks have been appropriately capitalized.  However, use of a
term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of
any trademark or service mark.

**Warning and Disclaimer**

Every effort has been made to make this book as complete and as
accurate as possible, but no warranty or fitness is implied.  The
information provided is on as "as-is" basis.  The author and the
publisher shall have neither liability nor responsibility to any
person or entity with respect to any loss or damages arising from the
information contained in this book.  No patent liability is assumed
with respect to the use of the information contained herein.

**Contacting The Publisher**

Please send documentation licensing inquiries and other business
communications to `Agendaless Consulting
<mailto:webmaster@agendaless.com>`_.  Please send software and other
technical queries to the `repoze-dev maillist
<http://lists.repoze.org/listinfo/repoze-dev>`_.
