.TH BURN "1" "" "burn"
.SH NAME
burn \- record from various sources to optical media (CD, DVD)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B burn
\fIMAIN_MODE\fR \fI[OPTIONS]\fR... \fI[FILE/S]...\fR
.br
.B burn \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
CD\[hy]writing program/script. Features Data\[hy]CD, Audio\[hy]CD, Copy on the fly, Iso\[hy]CD.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration files for burn are: ~/.burnrc or /etc/burn.conf.
You can edit them to change values.
If you don't have these files you can:
1) use burn\-configure utility 
2) take the configuration template, edit and copy it as ~/.burnrc or /etc/burn.conf
.PP
.SH MAIN MODES
\fB\-D, \-\-data\-cd\fR
.IP
To create Data\[hy]CD
.PP
\fB\-I, \-\-iso\-cd\fR
.IP
To create ISO\[hy]CD
.PP
\fB\-C, \-\-copy\-cd\fR
.IP
To copy CDs
.PP
\fB\-A, \-\-audio\-cd\fR
.IP
To create an audio CD from WAV, MP3 and ogg files
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
\fB# burn \-D \-p /etc/\fR
.IP
Creates a CD with /etc/ contents.
(you will find files and directories contained in /etc in CD's root.)
.PP
\fB# burn \-D \-p /home/bigpaul/video/summer_2003/spain.tar.gz\fR
.IP
Creates a CD with spain.tar.gz in CD's root
.PP
\fB# burn \-D \-r /etc/\fR
.IP
Creates a CD containing the whole /etc/ directory. (\-r preserves path)
.PP
\fB# burn \-D \-c /mail_2003 /home/bigpaul/Mail \-p /boot/vmli*\fR
.IP
Creates a CD containing the whole /home/bigpaul/Mail renamed
into /mail_2003. (\-c changes path name). This command also adds
in CD's root every vmli* file in /boot/ directory
.PP
\fB# burn \-I \-n image.iso\fR
.IP
Burns image.iso
.PP
\fB# burn \-C\fR
.IP
Copy CDs (disk at once).
.PP
\fB# burn \-A \-a *.wav\fR
.IP
Creates an Audio CD. Tracks come from wav files
.PP
\fB# burn \-A \-a *.mp3\fR
.IP
Creates an Audio CD. Tracks come from mp3 files
.PP
\fB# burn \-A \-a *.ogg\fR
.IP
Creates an Audio CD. Tracks come from Ogg Vorbis files
.PP
\fB# burn \-A \-a *.mp3 file.ogg track01.wav\fR
.IP
Creates an Audio CD preserving input order.
In this example the first audio tracks will come from
mp3 files, than we will find the one from file.ogg and
finally the one from track01.wav
.PP
.SH GENERAL OPTIONS
\fB\-s, \-\-simulate\fR
.IP
to perform a burn simulation
.PP
.SH DATA\[hy]CD OPTIONS
\fB\-p, \-\-path\fR
.IP
add file/s or path's content to CD\[hy]ROM's root. e.g.: \-p
/cvs/myproj/ . In this example we will find CD\[hy]ROM's root
filled with /cvs/myproj/ contents, but no
/cvs/myproj/ will be created
.PP
\fB\-r, \-\-preserve\-path\fR
.IP
add file/s or path's content to CD\[hy]ROM preserving
original path. e.g.: \-r /cvs/myproj/ . In this
example we will find /cvs/myproj/ in CD\[hy]ROM's root
.PP
\fB\-x, \-\-exclude\-path\fR
.IP
every file or directory matching this string will not be included
.PP
\fB\-c, \-\-change\-path\fR
.IP
old_path will be named new_path in CD\[hy]ROM. e.g.:
\-c /my_home/2004_Jan/ /home/bigpaul/ .
Thus /home/bigpaul/ will be named  /my_home/2004_Jan/ in CD\[hy]ROM.
.PP
\fB\-l, \-\-follow\-symlink\fR
.IP
this option allows burn to follow symbolic link directories
.PP
\fB\-m, \-\-multisession\fR
.IP
this option allows multisession CDs
.PP
.SH ISO\[hy]CD OPTIONS
\fB\-n, \-\-name\fR
.IP
image name
.PP
.SH AUDIO\[hy]CD OPTIONS
\fB\-a, \-\-audio\-file\fR
.IP
mp3, ogg or wav file/s
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Gaetano Paolone <bigpaul@hacknight.org>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \[co] 2003\-2004 Gaetano Paolone <bigpaul@hacknight.org>
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
