========
Pagelets
========

This package provides a very flexible base implementation for write view like
components which can be higly customized later in custom project. This is
needed if you have to write reusable components like needed in a framework.

What does this mean?

We separate the python view code from the template implementation. And we also
separate the template in at least two different templates like the content
template and a layout template.

This package uses the z3c.template and offers a implementaton for this
template patterns. Additionaly this package offers a ``pagelet`` directive
wich can be used for register pagelets.

Pagelets are views which can be called and support the update and render
pattern.


How do they work
----------------

A pagelet returns the rendered content without layout in the render method and
returns the layout code if we call them. See also z3c.template which shows
how the tempalte work. This samples will only show how the base implementation
located in the z3c.pagelet.browser module get used.


BrowserPagelet
--------------

The base implementation called BrowserPagelet offers built in __call__ and
render methods which provide the different template lookup. Take a look at the
BrowserPage class located in z3c.pagelet.browser and you can see that render
method returns a IPageTemplate and the __call__ method a ILayoutTemplate
defined in the z3c.layout package.

  # some test stuff
  >>> import os, tempfile
  >>> temp_dir = tempfile.mkdtemp()

  >>> import zope.interface
  >>> import zope.component
  >>> from z3c.pagelet import interfaces
  >>> from z3c.pagelet import browser

We start with define a page template rendering the pagelet content.

  >>> contentTemplate = os.path.join(temp_dir, 'contentTemplate.pt')
  >>> open(contentTemplate, 'w').write('''
  ...   <div class="content">
  ...     my template content
  ...   </div>
  ... ''')

And we also define a layout template rendering the layout for a pagelet.
This template will call the render method from a pagelet:

  >>> layoutTemplate = os.path.join(temp_dir, 'layoutTemplate.pt')
  >>> open(layoutTemplate, 'w').write('''
  ...   <html>
  ...     <body>
  ...       <div class="layout" tal:content="structure view/render">
  ...         here comes the content
  ...       </div>
  ...     </body>
  ...   </html>
  ... ''')

Let's now register the template for the view and request. We use the
TemplateFactory directly from the z3c.template package. This is commonly done
using the ZCML directive called ``z3c:pagelet``. Note that we do use a the
generic Interface as the view base interface for register the pagelet. This
allows us to register a more specific template in the next sample:

  >>> from zope.publisher.interfaces.browser import IDefaultBrowserLayer
  >>> from zope.pagetemplate.interfaces import IPageTemplate
  >>> from z3c.template.template import TemplateFactory
  >>> factory = TemplateFactory(contentTemplate, 'text/html')
  >>> zope.component.provideAdapter(factory,
  ...     (zope.interface.Interface, IDefaultBrowserLayer), IPageTemplate)

And register the layout template useing the ``Interface`` as registration base:

  >>> from z3c.template.interfaces import ILayoutTemplate
  >>> factory = TemplateFactory(layoutTemplate, 'text/html')
  >>> zope.component.provideAdapter(factory,
  ...     (zope.interface.Interface, IDefaultBrowserLayer), ILayoutTemplate)

Now define a view marker interface. Such a marker interface is used for let
use register our templates:

  >>> class IMyView(zope.interface.Interface):
  ...     pass

And we define a view class inherited from BrowserPagelet and implementing the
view marker interface:

  >>> class MyView(browser.BrowserPagelet):
  ...     zope.interface.implements(IMyView)

Now test the view providing the view and check the output:

  >>> from zope.publisher.browser import TestRequest
  >>> request = TestRequest()
  >>> myView = MyView(root, request)
  >>> print myView()
  <html>
    <body>
      <div class="layout">
        <div class="content">
          my template content
        </div>
      </div>
    </body>
  </html>

You can see the render method generates only the content:

  >>> print myView.render()
  <div class="content">
    my template content
  </div>


PageletRenderer
---------------

There is also a standard pattern for calling the render method on pagelet.
Using the pagelet renderer which is a IContentProvider makes it possible to
reuse existing laoyut template without the pagelet. if you like to reuse a
ayout template without a pagelet you simply have to provide another content
provider. It's flexible isn't it? As next let's show a sample using the
pagelet renderer.

We define a new layout template using the content provider called ```pagelet``


  >>> providerLayout = os.path.join(temp_dir, 'providerLayout.pt')
  >>> open(providerLayout, 'w').write('''
  ...   <html>
  ...     <body>
  ...       <div class="layout" tal:content="structure provider:pagelet">
  ...         here comes the content
  ...       </div>
  ...     </body>
  ...   </html>
  ... ''')

and register them. Now we use the specific interface defined inthe view:

  >>> factory = TemplateFactory(providerLayout, 'text/html')
  >>> zope.component.provideAdapter(factory,
  ...     (zope.interface.Interface, IDefaultBrowserLayer), ILayoutTemplate)

Now let's call the view:

  >>> print myView()
  Traceback (most recent call last):
  ...
  ContentProviderLookupError: pagelet

That's right, we need to register the content provider ``pagelet`` before we
can use them.

  >>> from zope.contentprovider.interfaces import IContentProvider
  >>> from z3c.pagelet import provider
  >>> zope.component.provideAdapter(provider.PageletRenderer,
  ...     provides=IContentProvider, name='pagelet')

Now let's call the view again:

  >>> print myView()
  <html>
    <body>
      <div class="layout">
        <div class="content">
          my template content
        </div>
      </div>
    </body>
  </html>


Add, Edit and Display forms (formlib)
------------------------------------

What whould the pagelet be without formlib base implementations? We offer base
implementations for add, edit and display forms based on the formlib

For the next tests we provide a generic form template like used in formlib.
this template is registered within this package as default for the formlib
based mixin classes:

  >>> from z3c import pagelet
  >>> baseDir = os.path.split(pagelet.__file__)[0]
  >>> formTemplate = os.path.join(baseDir, 'form.pt')
  >>> factory = TemplateFactory(formTemplate, 'text/html')
  >>> zope.component.provideAdapter(factory,
  ...     (interfaces.IPageletForm, IDefaultBrowserLayer), IPageTemplate)

And we define a new interface includig text attribute:

  >>> import zope.schema
  >>> class IDocument(zope.interface.Interface):
  ...     """A document."""
  ...     text = zope.schema.TextLine(title=u'Text', description=u'Text attr.')

Also define a content object whcih implements the interface:

  >>> class Document(object):
  ...     zope.interface.implements(IDocument)
  ...     text = None
  >>> document = Document()

PageletAddForm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now let's define a add from base on the PageletAddForm class:

  >>> from zope.formlib import form
  >>> class MyAddForm(browser.PageletAddForm):
  ...     form_fields = form.Fields(IDocument)
  ...     def createAndAdd(self, data):
  ...         title = data.get('title', u'')
  ...         doc = Document()
  ...         doc.title = title
  ...         root['document'] = doc
  ...         return doc

Now render the form:

  >>> addForm = MyAddForm(root, request)
  >>> print addForm()
  <html>
    <body>
      <div class="layout">
        <form action="http://127.0.0.1" method="post"
              enctype="multipart/form-data" class="edit-form"
              id="zc.page.browser_form">
          <table class="form-fields">
            <tr>
              <td class="label">
                <label for="form.text">
                <span class="required">*</span><span>Text</span>
                </label>
              </td>
              <td class="field">
                <div class="form-fields-help"
                     id="field-help-for-form.text">Text attr.</div>
                <div class="widget"><input class="textType" id="form.text"
                     name="form.text" size="20" type="text" value=""  /></div>
              </td>
            </tr>
          </table>
        <div class="form-controls">
          <input type="submit" id="form.actions.add" name="form.actions.add"
                 value="Add" class="button" />
        </div>
      </form>
    </div>
    </body>
  </html>


PageletEditForm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now let's define a edit from base on the PageletEditForm class...

  >>> class MyEditForm(browser.PageletEditForm):
  ...     form_fields = form.Fields(IDocument)

and render the form:

  >>> document.text = u'foo'
  >>> editForm = MyEditForm(document, request)
  >>> print editForm()
  <html>
    <body>
      <div class="layout">
        <form action="http://127.0.0.1" method="post"
              enctype="multipart/form-data" class="edit-form"
              id="zc.page.browser_form">
          <table class="form-fields">
              <tr>
                <td class="label">
                  <label for="form.text">
                  <span class="required">*</span><span>Text</span>
                  </label>
                </td>
                <td class="field">
                  <div class="form-fields-help"
                       id="field-help-for-form.text">Text attr.</div>
                  <div class="widget"><input class="textType" id="form.text"
                       name="form.text" size="20" type="text" value="foo"
                       /></div>
                </td>
              </tr>
          </table>
          <div class="form-controls">
            <input type="submit" id="form.actions.apply"
                   name="form.actions.apply" value="Apply" class="button" />
          </div>
        </form>
      </div>
    </body>
  </html>


PageletSisplayForm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now let's define a display from base on the PageletDisplayForm class...

  >>> class MyDisplayForm(browser.PageletDisplayForm):
  ...     form_fields = form.Fields(IDocument)

and render the form:

  >>> document.text = u'foo'
  >>> displayForm = MyDisplayForm(document, request)
  >>> print displayForm()
  <html>
    <body>
      <div class="layout">
        <form action="http://127.0.0.1" method="post"
              enctype="multipart/form-data" class="edit-form"
              id="zc.page.browser_form">
          <table class="form-fields">
              <tr>
                <td class="label">
                  <label for="form.text">
                  <span>Text</span>
                  </label>
                </td>
                <td class="field">
                  <div class="form-fields-help"
                       id="field-help-for-form.text">Text attr.</div>
                  <div class="widget">foo</div>
                </td>
              </tr>
          </table>
        </form>
      </div>
    </body>
  </html>


Cleanup
-------

  >>> import shutil
  >>> shutil.rmtree(temp_dir)
