.TH pycoverage 1 "2004-09-10" "logilab devtools"

.SH NAME
.B pycoverage 
\- calculates coverage of given module. Produces report and listings of covered lines


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B  pycoverage -\fICOMMAND
[
.I OPTIONS
] [
.I args
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Part of logilab's devtools.

.SH COMMANDS
pycoverage \fB-x\fR MODULE.py [ARG1 ARG2 ...]
    Execute module, passing the given command-line arguments, collecting
    coverage data.

pycoverage \fB-e\fR
    Erase collected coverage data.

pycoverage \fB-r\fR [\fB-m\fR] DIR1 FILE1 FILE2 ...
    Report on the statement coverage for the given files.  With the -m
    option, show line numbers of the statements that weren't executed.

pycoverage \fB-a\fR [\fB-d\fR dir] DIR1 FILE1 FILE2 ...
    Make annotated copies of the given files, marking statements that
    are executed with > and statements that are missed with !.  With
    the -d option, make the copies in that directory.  Without the -d
    option, make each copy in the same directory as the original.

Coverage data is saved in the file .coverage by default.  Set the
COVERAGE_FILE environment variable to save it somewhere else.

.SH SEE ALSO
/usr/share/doc/pythonX.Y-devtools/

.SH COPYRIGHT 
(c) 2004 Logilab. General Public Licence.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify 
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published 
by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, 
or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, 
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of 
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the 
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License 
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software 
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, 
MA 02111-1307 USA.
.SH BUGS 
Full listing at http://intranet.logilab.fr/jpl

.SH AUTHOR
Logilab <contact@logilab.fr>
