restindex
    page-title: pyreport download 
    crumb: pyreport
    link-title: pyreport download
    page-description:
        An utility to generate report from python scripts
    /description
    file: pyreport
/restindex

uservalues
    page_keywords: pyreport python literate programming pylab scipy numpy literal
/uservalues

============================================
 download `pyreport`
============================================

.. sidebar:: Downloads :
    :class: leftsidebar   
    
    .. include:: /home/varoquau/www/src/computers/pyreport/download.rst
    
    * `pyreport 0.2.8 <./pyreport-0.2.8>`_

    * `pyreport 0.1.8 <./pyreport-0.1.8>`_
    
.. warning::

    Version 0.2.11 has an ugly bug that was introduced in 0.2.9. I am
    working on it. In the mean time you might consider using 0.2.8 which
    has a much less important bug.


News
====

Thanks to Tom Denniston I know have some testing under windows. I made a
few changes that he suggested to get pyreport working better under
windows with MikTeX.

pyreport is now under a BSD license !

I have switched from svn to bzr, and have opened a launchpad account for
pyreport: `https://launchpad.net/products/pyreport
<https://launchpad.net/products/pyreport>`_. You can now get the
developement version and hack on pyreport.

Pyreport can output trac syntax

Pyreport can output moinmoin syntax !!

Pyreport can output html ! try it out !! Now that pyreport doesn't rely
anymore on LaTeX, I need people to try and run it on windows and help me
make it windows friendly.

Installing
===========

Currently `pyreport` is nothing but a python script (it can also be used as a
module). On Unices it should just be made executable and go in a
directory in the PATH (or have a link in a directory in the PATH). I am
wait for advice on how to use it under windows.

To use `pyreport` just call it with the name of the script you want to
compile to a report. For example ``pyreport myscript.py``. `pyreport`
will generate a pdf (or a html, if it cannot find LaTeX) called
`myscript.pdf`. See the command line switches for more info.

Release notes
==============

`pyreport` 0.2.11
-----------------

Fixed a typo in the help generating code. Thanks Guenter Milde. Now the
help works.

`pyreport` 0.2.10
-----------------

Fixed a bug reported by Tom Denniston. It turned out to be a tough one.
The good thing is that it forced me to do some refactoring in the parsing
code. I find all this code so ugly nowadays. It should be written with
some use of the "yield" statement. I just need to find some time between
other projects.

`pyreport` 0.2.9
----------------

A few modification to make `pyreport` more windows-friendly. This release
was made a bit in a hurry, but it passes the tests. I hope I haven't
broken anything.

`pyreport` 0.2.8
-----------------

This is just a maintenance release. I have modified tiny bits of pyreport
as I have used it over the last few months. Nothing much, though.

`pyreport` 0.2.7
-----------------

Started unit-testing pyreport. This has forced my to move around its
internals a lot. It is moving away from the sript approach to the module
approach. The code is much cleaner and I think I busted a few minor bugs.
Only minor features added. More features will come when I am satisfied
with the "big design"...

`pyreport` 0.2.6
-----------------

This is just a code clean-up.

`pyreport` 0.2.5
-----------------

Improved the functions to use pyreport as a module rather than a script
(the function "main" which should be used by external code calling
pyreport) can now take a StringIO object, and can return a string of the
compiled report.

Also added the ability to use pyreport with pipes, both input and output.
I Hacked a lot today. God knows how many bugs my sleep deprived brain has
slipped in the code :->. Please report them !!

`pyreport` 0.2.4
-----------------

I spent some time consolidating pyreport, especially its command line
switches. I am trying to make it windows ready but I definitely need help
and advice on how to package it for windows.

`pyreport` 0.2.3
-----------------

First go at outputing moinmoin syntax. This should be useful for the
scipy.org website. Please test the moin-moin synthax, and report thebugs
or improvements needed to the moin-moin output driver, as I do not know
moin moin very well

`pyreport` 0.2.2
-----------------

Add a special type of comment: line starting by "#pyreport" are now
processed as command line switches. For instance if you have in your
script a line "#pyreport -d", the document will be compiled in double
page. This overrides the command line switches. This is still
experimental !

`pyreport` 0.2.1
-----------------

Made the inline latex escape green by default, as it usually appears in
comments.

`pyreport` 0.2.0
-----------------

Extensive refactoring of the code, features have been added, probavly new
bug too !

The processing code has been change to allow for mixing code indented
blocks and literate comments.

The output code has been change to have an interchangeable backend
compiler allowing for outputing to different filetypes.

First version of the html output driver !

`pyreport` 0.1.8
-----------------

Last version of the first code base. A lot of bugs have been hunted
thanks to Otto Tronarp and Robert Cimrman.

David Grant suggested a way to overload the pylab.show call in a
cleaner way. This will now also work in the code imported from the
script being executed from pyreport.

